In our one dimensional examples,
the system state was represented by one variable.
An N-dimensional systems, the state is a vector with N state variables.
If we are to explore a two dimensional example,
these two state variables could be the x and y position of a robot.
Or if you're looking for a more interesting example,
it could be the position and the velocity of a robot.
This leads right into another important matter.
When working in one dimension,
your state has to be observable,
meaning that it had to be something that can be measured directly.
In multi-dimensional states, there may exist hidden state variables,
ones that you cannot measure with the sensors available,
however, you may be able to and further value from other states and measurements.
In this example, the location of the robot is observable,
while its velocity is not,
making it a hidden state variable.
However, a robot's position and velocity
over time are linked through a very simple formula.
Let's look at this on a graph.
If initially, the position of the robot is known,
but its velocity is not,
the estimate of the robot's state would look like so,
a Gaussian that is very narrow in
the X dimension representing confidence about the robot's location,
and very wide in the X dot dimension,
since the robot's velocity is completely unknown.
Next, a state prediction can be calculated.
This is where the common filter starts to get exciting.
Knowing the relationship between the hidden variable and observable variable is key.
Let's assume that one iteration of the common filter takes one second.
Now, using the formula,
we can calculate the posterior state for each possible velocity.
For instance, if the velocity is zero,
the posterior state would be identical to the prior and if the velocity is one,
the posterior would be here and so forth.
From this, we can draw a posterior Gaussian that looks like so.
This doesn't yet tell us anything about the velocity.
It just graphs the correlation between the velocity and the location of the robot.
However, what do we have next, a measurement update.
Let's see if it will be able to provide us with
sufficient information to identify the velocity of the robot.
The Initial Belief was useful to calculate the state prediction but has
no additional value and the result of
the state prediction can be called a Prior Belief for our measurement update.
Let's say that the new measurement suggests a location of X equals 50.
Now, if we apply the measurement update to our prior,
we will have a very small posterior centered around X equals 50,
and X dot equals 50.
This may look like magic,
but it's the exact same measurement update that you applied before,
implemented in two dimensions. Take a look.
This was the Prior Belief and here is the measurement.
The Posterior Belief is just a weighted sum of the
two and more confident than either the prior or the measurement.
Then, the relationship between the two dimensions
narrows down the posterior for the X dot axis.
After all, if the robot moved from X equals 35 to X equals 50 in one second,
the speed should be trivial to calculate.
And so it seems that two iterations of
the common filter cycle were enough to infer the robot's velocity.
Continuing iterating through the measurement update and state prediction
steps will update the robot's internal state
to keep it aligned with where it is in the real world.
Now, let's look at the linear algebra equations
that enable this and apply them in the common filter.